<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>September 27th: My Beloved Barbara Alexievna</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-50" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">September 27th: My Beloved Barbara Alexievna</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">September 27th.</p>
			</header>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My beloved <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Barbara Alexievna</span></span>⁠—I have carefully fulfilled your commissions. Madame Chiffon informs me that she herself had thought of using tambour work as being more suitable (though I did not quite take in all she said). Also, she has informed me that, since you have given certain directions in writing, she has followed them (though again I do not clearly remember all that she said⁠—I only remember that she said a very great deal, for she is a most tiresome old woman). These observations she will soon be repeating to you in person. For myself, I feel absolutely exhausted, and have not been to the office today⁠ ⁠… Do not despair about the future, dearest. To save you trouble I would visit every shop in <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg. You write that you dare not look forward into the future. But by tonight, at seven o’clock, you will have learned all, for Madame Chiffon will have arrived in person to see you. Hope on, and everything will order itself for the best. Of course, I am referring only to these accursed gewgaws, to these frills and fripperies! Ah me, ah me, how glad I shall be to see you, my angel! Yes, how glad I shall be! Twice already today I have passed the gates of your abode. Unfortunately, this Bwikov is a man of such choler that⁠—Well, things are as they are.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">Makar Dievushkin.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
