<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>August 19th: My Dearest Barbara Alexievna</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">August 19th: My Dearest Barbara Alexievna</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">August 19th.</p>
			</header>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dearest <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Barbara Alexievna</span></span>,-Yes, I <em>am</em> ashamed to meet you, my darling⁠—I <em>am</em> ashamed. At the same time, what is there in all this? Why should we not be cheerful again? Why should I mind the soles of my feet coming through my boots? The sole of one’s foot is a mere bagatelle⁠—it will never be anything but just a base, dirty sole. And shoes do not matter, either. The Greek sages used to walk about without them, so why should we coddle ourselves with such things? Yet why, also, should I be insulted and despised because of them? Tell Thedora that she is a rubbishy, tiresome, gabbling old woman, as well as an inexpressibly foolish one. As for my grey hairs, you are quite wrong about them, inasmuch as I am not such an old man as you think. Emelia sends you his greeting. You write that you are in great distress, and have been weeping. Well, I too am in great distress, and have been weeping. Nay, nay. I wish you the best of health and happiness, even as I am well and happy myself, so long as I may remain, my darling⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your friend,</span></p>
			<footer>
				<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Makar Dievushkin.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
